The Project Gutenberg EBook of Rozmowa Pòlocha z Kaszëba, by Florian Ceynowa

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Rozmowa Pòlocha z Kaszëba

Author: Florian Ceynowa

Release Date: March 9, 2009 [EBook #28296]

Language: Kashubian and Polish

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ROZMOWA PÒLOCHA Z KASZËBA ***




Produced by Zasoby Kaszubsko-Pomorskie/Nasze Kaszuby
(http://www.naszekaszuby.pl), Project Rastko - Kashuby,
Zoran Stefanovic, Jimmy O'Regan and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://dp.rastko.net





Rozmowa

Pólocha s Kaszeba

napjsano przez

s. p. Xedza Szmuka z Pucka,

a do dreku pódano

przez

Sena Wójkwójca ze Slawószena.

Roku Panskjeho 1850.

Dregje vedanje,

s Krajobraze Zemje Kaszebskje.

V Svjecu nad Vjsla
wu czarnoxeznjka J. Hauffe.

1865.




Dobri zort
Tinfa vort.

Przeslovje Kaszebskje.

Wójas, jak zdechel.
Polcamj rechel,
Bó bel grocz.

Z leforki rebackje.




Rozmova Polaka s Kaszuba.

Póloch. Zkad Ti jestes, Chlopje?

Kaszeba. Jo jem z Kaszeb, Panje.

Pól. Co to sa te Kaszubi?

Kasz. Panje, je to kroj wód Bóga zdovna wóbjecani, krój svjeti, v
chterim mleko o mjód plenje; a ledze, co v tim kraju mjeszkaja, nazevaja
se ledzamj vebranemj, póchódzacemj wód Jizraela dovneho.

P. Ja sliszalem o vjelorakich Kaszubach. K. Jo, Panje; e moj wójc, co
bel bógati, bó mjel sztere wóle e sztere kónje, a mjeszkel vjele lat v
jedni vsi Kaszebski, dze bel przeseznim, narachóvel dwójakich: jedni sa
grebi, a dregi sa Fein-Kaszebj. Grebi sa ti, co njmaja swójich
przevjlejov, anje takieh lask wód Pana Boga, jakje maja Fein-Kaszebj,
chterzi przez swóje meztwo,--co je napjsane v xedze chronikorum
Kaszebski, Tomje II. zeszece 30. na stronje 179, a to v te slova: Nom
jich kaze bjc, a vszetkieb wubjjeme--vjeczni sobje zaszczet wu caleho
svjata zrobjle. Ztad póvstalo mjono nasze Kazebj czele Kaszebj; e vjes,
njedalek bójovjszcza lezaco, Slawószeno mu pó vjeczne czase nasze slave
glosec e slava slenac; a nasz Xaze Svjatopelk, co pótenu tak wójovel,
jakbe cali svjat chcel pelknac, zo to nam nadel rozne diploma, chtere
jesz pódzisdzen leza na roteszu Puckim, jako v stolecznim mjesce zemje
Kaszebskje. Pódregje mame me no se slane vszetkje te laski, chtere mjele
ni dovni naszi przodkovje; Abraham, Jizak, Jakub, Mojzesz e jinni.

P. Moj Bracje;, jak vjdze, to njbi cos do pravdi movjsz i fundamentalnie
vivodzjsz; ale njemoglbis mi granje vaszej zjemj opjsac.

K. Panje, grance Kaszebskje sa v móji glovje tak mócno veznaczone, ze
jich njgde zabec nimoge; e tak kózde dzecko, co se dzis na svjat rodzi,
ju vjtro je polce wukazeje. Grance Kaszebskje jida, póczavsze wód
Gdanska, starozetneho Gaza, góra Libanska, a pónaszemu górami
Kólibskimj, bó me barzo rod kó dodajeme, prze melim mórze Genezareckim,
prze vjelgim morze Strzodzemnim, pólacenje mare mediterraneum zvanim, co
lezi mjedze zemjamj Preska, Reska, Szvecka, Dunska e Pómórska, jasz do
Wusco Slepskjeho e dali rzeka, do njeho vpodajaca; a vrocaja puszcza
Jizraëlska, pónaszemu Tuchólska, nad granica Filistinska czele
krzizacka, bó ten naród bel krzize dlo Kaszebov, prze Samariji, to je
Marienburgu dzisejszim czele zemj Malbórski do Gdanska.

P. Ale, moj Bracje, ja sliszalem, ze Kaszubj po urodzenju dzjevjec dnj
sa slepimj; vjec to musj bic grubi narod, vcale do Polakov njepodobni i
vatpje, czili do pravdzivego czlovjeka.

K. Moj Panje, jo jem wó tim njeczel, anje jem vjedzel. Ale dajme,
przepusceme, ze Kaszebj pó wurodzenju dzevjne dnjov sa slepemj ale kje
wonj dzesateho dnja przezdrza, tej wónj tesz e przez debova deske vjdza,
a zos Pólosze abo Mazurze, chóc zaros prze wurodzenju przezdrza, to
jednak pótemu przez cale zece sa slepemj.

P. Kochani Bracje, ja sliszalem vjele o Kaszubach i jich kraju,
jednakovoz jich poczatku dovodzjè njemoge; gdiz rozni róznje o njch
povjadaja, i njevjem, komu z njeh mam vjerzic.

K. Panje kóchani, kje jo co rzeke, to ju vjerze jak pjsmovj, bò Kaszeba,
kje wón provde godo, zodna mjara lgac njmoze. Provda, ze Kaszebj
njegodaja ze storech szpargalov bò se v storech papjorarch, xegach, cobe
jim na vekozanje jich pòczatku sluzele, njekòchaja. Ale te, co wónj
mjele, muzsel kòzdi vjarogòdni przesezni jedneho veznaczoneho doja do
glovneho mjasta Pucka przenjese; a zebravsze vszetkje pjsma wòd Jadama
jasz do wòbjabjenjo svjeteho Jana, wulozele wònj je v jedne xege e
kozale ja drekovac e dale ji nazve "Biblejo." A tak vedrekovavsze jedne
xazke z nech storech szpargalov, zalepjle wònj sobje tu temj pòdezas ne
vjelgje zeme, wò chteri jesz njejeden z nas czel, pòkazone wòkna.

P. Ale, moj Bracje, juzes tez teraz sklamal, povjadajac, ze Kaszubj
mjeli stare papjeri, bo starodavnj na tablicach lub skórze pjsali.

K. Moj Panje, jo meszle, ze jo jem provde pòvjedzel, bò Kaszeba njm se
rodzi, to ju mo gòtova kòszele; a dze je plotnjano kòszela, te musza bec
s czase szotore, a ze szotor robja v Kaszebach papjor, dlo teho muszel
bec rechli papjor jak toblece abo skora. Skore pòtrzebuja ledze na
skòrznje, do sli e te dali, a toblece le do karczme abo dlo dzeci do
szkòle. A jakle jo, moj wòjc, meho wòjca--wòjca wòjc pamjetac mògle e
mozeme, to vjedno szotornjce do papjernj szotore skupjale, e to bel
vjelgi handel v Kaszebach. Jo pòzvolaje no to, ze v Pòlsce na skórach e
toblecach pjsale e pjsza, bò te mjele e maja vjele bedla e drzeva, a
przez to vjele skor e toblec; ale wu nas je vjele lne e szotor, a ztad e
vjele papjore.

P. Moj Bracje, jak ja slisze, to Ti Kaszubov vistavjasz na vjelkich
ludzj; albovjem, kjedi onj Biblija vidali, to musjeli albo apostolamj
albo cos nad apostoli bic. Zaczim i to, co v njej czitami, musjalo sje
nje v Palestinje, ale v Kaszubach stac.

K. Moj Panje, jo jem se wuczel dosc vesokje szkòle e mjel jem szkolneho,
co liczel przez setmedzeset lat e vjele mog pamjetac; a ten mje
pòvjodel, ze pòlacenje Palestina zovje se pònaszemu Kaszebe.

P. Ej, moj Bracje, twoje Kaszubi sa Palestina! Pokaz mj tez jedne vjoske
podobna do Palestinskich; a zaraz Cj uvjerze.

K. Cho, cho! moj Panje, kò nje jedne vjes, ale jo Vam pòkozol e pòkoze
mjasta, mjasteczka, mòrza, jezora, gore, rzeki, puszcze e cale kraje,
zgòla vszetko, co kje wuczejece - chebabe jesce njezevi bele - muszice
se Pòlocha veprzesic, a wòstac Fein-Kaszeba.

P. Moj Bracje, povjedz mj tez; gdzje bil Raj? Boc pevno v Palestinje.

K. Moj Panje, Roj bel e je v Kaszebach, te dze se sztere rzeki schòdza;
ale szkòda, ze do njeho teros njmozeme danc anje doplenac, tak vlosnje,
jak Vpan do swòjeho raju njmozesz; a kjebe jes te proce pòdja, lo jo le
gvesno rzec mòge, zebe jes do nasze zemje zaszed, zkadbe jes potemu
njevjedzel, dze se wudac, bò do Raju je ju teros ceszko trafjc, chebabe
do Kaszeb se chcalo.

P. Moj kochani Kaszuba, povjedz mj tez, gdzje na vaszej zjemj sa ove
puszcze, przez które Jizraëlicj przecbodzjli i v ktorich sje 40 lat
bavjli?

K. Tak, moj Panje, mòji przodkovje bele na puszczi, chtero se nazeva
Charavia pòlacenje, a teros ja Kaszebj zovja v roznech mjescach roznje,
ale glovna czesc jednak perzinke z lacinska Karvja czele
Karvjanskim-blote. Tu wònj lazele szterdzesce lat.

P. Ej, moj Bracje, ja vjem, ze to bloto jest male; moze tilko ma czteri
mjle dlugoscj i pólmjli szirokoscj.

K. Mój kochiani Panje, ta puszczo zoczino se wod czervonjeho mórza, co
se nazevo pólacenje mare recens, a pónaszemu zatoka Frigska; a to dlo
teho, ze tu nad ta wóda bela Frigijo, provincijo Perziji czele zemju
Preskje, e cignje se vnet pjaszczestemj brzegamj, vnet wurodzajnemj
kepamj, vnet trovnemj albo torfovemj blotamj prze melim mórze
Genezareckim e vjegim mórze Balteckim jasz do jezora Zarnovskjeho, lacus
Piasnensis. Do Meleho mórza vpodo rzeka Jordan, co se pónaszemu Plutnjca
zovje; a to dlo teho, ze tu lud Póganski e Zedovski wóstel wód grzechov
wóplokani. Oj, kjebele Vpan nasze stora mape czele landkorte, na chteri
krajobroz cale nasze zemje se znajdeje, vjdzel; jak wónj to szle przez
te puszcze, kje na nj jesz vjelgje lase e wóde belo, tobe Vpan se
njepomalu zdzevjel: bó wónj to tu, to te, to donad, to nazod, jak reki
lazele. Kó tej jesz zodne drogi, anje ros stegne pódceve te njebelo. Dlo
teho njmozeme se dzevjc, ze to tak dlugo derovalo, bó wónj tesz rzase e
dobrze se na nj mjele, kje jim le glod njedokuczel. Vjele mjesc, przez
chtere wónj przechódzele, jesz pódzisdzen wód jich szczesco abo
njeszczesco swóje mjona maja, tak v Wólivje pósodale wónj jesz wólive,
ale v Kólibkach bele wónj ju tak zmeczoni, ze se le kólibale e muszele
se na posilk do Copote copnac. V Grabovce narznele wónj sobje grabovech
kijov e palec, ale mjmo teho v Chilonj ju vjele jich se le tak chilelo,
a prze Cesovj muszel jeden dregjeho dali cesnac. Pótemu przeszle wónj do
blota Zamóstneho, dze se mjele drobke lepj, bó tu natrafjle vjele
pasturzi, co dobetk pasle e njemógac naszim przodkom stavjc wópore jich
dobrze póczestovale e jim móst przez rzeke zbudovale, abe se tech
njeproszonech gósci jak norechli ze sve vede pózbec. Ztad póvze vjes
Móste e to cale bloto swóje mjono. Dali szle wónj przez kepe Pucka e
Svorzevska dlo blota Karvjanskjeho; nawóstatku trafjle wónj do Jericho,
pónaszemu Cechócena, a to dlo teho je tak przezvale, bó tu se barzo
ceszele. Wuceszoni njedale wónj sobje czase, abe przez rzeke ku
Jerozolemje móst vestavjle, le redale; zkad rzeka e vjes Reda swóje
mjono vzele. A ze coros barzi mjesce placze smjech zajmóvel, pókazeje
vjes Smjechova. Jesz jo Vpane co vjci póvjim. Kje Mojzesz veslel
wóredovnjkov, cobe se vevjadovale wó zemj wóbjecani, tej jich zdradzele.
No te to pamjatke wuzdrzisz Vpan pore kot, prze ti puszczi vestavjonech,
co se nazevaja Zdrada. Meho wójca wójc mje póvjodel, ze jeho wójc jesz
pamjetel jeden vadol Jizraëlski njedalek tech zabudovan. Abe ta pomjatka
njgde njevegasla, vestavjono tu chalupe, chtero pódziszdzen wód
vszetkich jinszech checzi stoji wóddolono, bó v nj mjeszkaja ledze, co
le njeba szukaja.

P. Póvjedz mj tez na której górze jest u vas Mojzesz pochovani?

K. Panje, wu nas je pó gorach vjele grobov Jizraëlskich, mjedze chteremj
mozeze tesz je grob Mojzesza. Jeszle Vpan wjesz, na chteri gorze v
Palestinje Mozesz lezi, to mje wukaze, a jo tesz pókoze na chteri wu
nas. Ale naszi przodkovje nam to do vjadomósce podale, ze sami
njevjedzele, dze jeho anjolovje zanjesle.

P. A sluchajze, moj kochani, gdzje sje tez Christus urodzil? Vszakze
pravda, ze v Bettlehem.

K. Provda, Panje, v Bettlehem Hebrajskim, a Kaszubskim Betovje. Bó
Bettlehem nazevo se pónaszemu, jak me vjernje przeklodome, Betowo; a te
wón se wurodzel.

P. A Pjoter, apostol, zkad bil rodem?

K. Wód morza z Kreszvjce, chteroto vjes rebacko jesz pódziszdzen se tim
chelpj.

P. A Pavel zkad?

K. Z Bolszeva, bó te bela tej bóznjca Zedovsko, a won bel jich novezszim
szkolnim.

P. Moj kochani, pamjetam, zes ta bardzo zachwalil stoleczne mjasto
Kaszub; povjedz mj tez, zkad ma sve slavne jimije?

K. Ho, moj Panje, wó timbe trzeba vjele gadac, ale jo to krotko póvjem.
Kjej Pjoter lovjel rebe na mórze, tej przeszed Kristus e rzek do njeho:
Pjotrze puc za mna, e to do trzece rize póvtorzel; a ztad to mjasto
dostalo mjono Puck, chterebo przed tim njmjalo. A pó njechterim czase,
jak ju belo znacznim mjaste, bela v njm akciza czele czlo, prze chterim
sedzel Matteusz, evanjelista, czlovjek dosc pjsmjenni, co jeho sobje
Kristus za wucznja przebrel, jak madre v naszim storim wópjsanju. A ze
to czlo czele col se glovnje prze bramje ku pelnjovi wódbjeralo, dosta
ztad jedna vjes, bleze lezaco, mjono Celbowo.

P. Pravda, ze slavne sa Kaszubi, kjedi apostolov vidali.

K. O jo, Panje, njetelko vse e mjasta, ale navet pustkóvjo nom
njejedneho apóstola vedale. Moj Panje, czase dobre wódmjenjaja se czesto
v zle; a jednak e bele e sa ledze, co dobre czase pamjetaja: tak e
mjasta zamjenjaja se njeros na vse. Jak stori ledze póvjodaja, belo
przed tim wu nas vjele mjast, co teros sa vsamj, bo dze przed tim stojel
kóscol, te teros czesto stoja kószare, a dze przed tim bel jaki palac
abo dwor. te teros je chalupka wógrodnjczo. Tak pód mcho wójca checzamj
bele e sa sklepe e kóretorze, co provadza vje Bog dze. Z te przeczene
muszel tu przed vjele lati bec jaki vspanjali zamk. Ale chóc se
mjasteczka e mjasta ve vse wódmjenjaja, to jednak sveho mjona njgde
njetraca. Tak jobe mog Vpane vjele mjast pókazac, co teros sa vsamj, a
jednak maja nazvjtka mjast nech dovnech. Ale wó tim ju gvesno je dosc.

P. Moj Bracje, povjedz mj tez, gdzje jest ta puszcza, v której zostaval
Christus?

K. Moj Panje, jo se dolebog na mapach czele krajobrazach dobrze
njeznaje; ale gvesno mdze Vpan lepj vjedzel, dze sa puszcze Valdovskje,
a te Kristus wóstovel.

P. A vjecéj mjast juz njemasz?

K. Pan gvesno njeros z evanjelije czel, ze wumarleho njesle z Naim.
chtereho Kristus vskrzesel; a to mjasteczko je, teros chócle vsa, wu nas
e nazevo se pónaszemu Nanc. Bleze mórza je Genezaret, co pónaszemu
nazevo st; Gnjezdzewo. Kó jednak muszel Genezaret bec bleze mórza, bó
mame v pjsmje, ze Kristns chódzel prze morze Genezareckim. Dlo tebo Vpan
jesz pódzisdzen njedalek naszeho Gnjezdzeva vjdzisz morze, zazveczoj
Melim zvane. Vjesz tesz Vpan dobrze, ze v novi Jerozolemje je Kristus
wumeczoni. Ta Jerozolema je wu nas, v naszech Kaszebarh, e nazevo se
teros Vejheropolis, Vejherovo abo Novemjasto. Jeszle se Vpan chcesz wó
provdze przekónac, to tej le te jidze, a wuzdrzisz ne slovna brame,
wógrod Jecemanski czele wógrojc, rzeke Cedron, dom Annasza e Kaifasza,
ne smrodleva pjvnjce, Pilota e Heroda palace, nen slovni rotesz, takze
droge, chtera Kristus s krzize szed na gore kalvariska, dze jeho
wukrzizovale, e grob, v chteri jcha zlozele.--Kjebe jes Vpan do teho
mjasta przeszed, tohe chóc nomjesze dzecko, co te dobrze pó gorach lazec
wumjeje, Vam to vszetko pókozalo. Jednak mje teros Vpan wuvjerzisz.

P. A Rzim jest daleko od vas?

K. Ale dosc dalek, bó Rzim nazevo se pónaszemu Pjotrowo czele
Pjotrogarda (Petersburg) pó Pjotrze; abo, jak njejedni z Remje chca,
Remjo, co lezi njedalek wód trakte ze Gdanska do Jerozoleme.

P. A Kartagina, gdzje tez jest?

K. Kartagina nazevo se pónaszemu Kópenhoga, mjasto jesz pódzisdzen
vjelgi handel provadzace Njechterzi mjeszkance Kortoszena, wuvozaja
Kortoszeno za Kartagine, co lezi njedalek Zarnovca, bleze gor
Korlekóvskich. V ton sam spósob meszla Svorzevjanj, ze dovno Samarijo je
Svorzewo. Ale jak vjeme, pójedinczi ledze móga se bardzo letko melec.
Jesz jedne rzecz to Vpane póvjem. Kó doch Vpan wumjeje pólacenje. Je wu
nas njedalek Jerozoleme czele Novehomjasta no mjesce, wó chterim mame:
Stetit Jezus in loco campestri. To mjesce nazevo se teros Kapjno; e jesz
dzisdzen kózdi przechódzaci te vstapj, abo dlo wugaszenjo pragnjaczki,
abo na nocleg, abo tesz na jaka rozrivke. Na tim molu e Jezus, jak szed
do Jerozoleme ze Slawószena przez Bózastopke, chtera mjedze Mechóva a
Pjosznjca v kamjenjn vecesnjona vjdzime, stana.--

Ale teros, Mósce Dobrodzeju, jo tesz se zapitaje. Póvjedz mje Vpan, jaka
móva apóstolovje godale, jak na njuh svjeti Duch zestapjel?

P. Moj Bracje, ja misle, ze roznemj jezikamj, bo tak mami z davnich
vjescj.

K. Ho nje, moj Panje! Jo vjem, ze le jedna móva godale.

P. Przecjez nje po Kaszubsku!

K. Vlosnje tak; bó to je móva!--Zebe jes ja Vpan znel, to zarzekaje se,
zebe jes bel apóstole, bó v ti jedni móvje zavjeraja se vszetkje jinne,
te je Pólsko, Serbsko, Czesko, Resko, Presko, Letevsko, Mjemjecko,
Szvecko, Dunsko, Egjelsko, Francesko, Lacinsko, Grecko, Hebrajsko jednim
slove, vszelkje móve; a z tech zrobjel Pan Bog jedne godke e nazvel ja
Kaszebska; ale wuzeczel je le tim, co sa te gódnosce vort.

P. Moj Bracje, móv mi przinajmnjej kilka slov czisto Kaszubskich.

K. Nekó pójle Vasc sa a mdzema doch drobke korbala.

P. Moj Bracje, tego ja njerozumjem.

K. Kó teras Vpan vjdzisz, jako to snozo móva. jakje to pyszne, vebórne
slova. Cobe jes Vpon del, zebe jes ja wumjel?

P. A cobi trzeba uczinjc, zebi sje tego jezika nauczic?

K. Wóstac Fein-Kaszeba.

P. Ale jakrzebi to trzeba zrobjc?

K. Kó tobe nolepj tak szlo. Vpan pudze ze mna do stoleczneho mjasta
Pucka; a jo te za Vpane vnjose instancija, abe Vpana przejele.

P. A któz to przymuje?

K. Novezszo rada Kaszebsko, co se na rotesz cotidzen schódzi w v
starosvjeckim wubjorze Ja musisz Vpan wó przejece do tak znaczneho
wóbevatelstva prosec. Pótemu koza ti przelozoni Kaszeb vjelga xege
Kaszebska przenjesc e Pana mjono e przezvjstko zapjsac; a tej dadza
trebje e strzelac na vivat; nawóstatku pórpovadza wónj Vpana do vegorza,
co lezi na lencuchu wurzeszoni e codzen dva kórce slode pózero e beczke
pjva vepijo. Jak to vszetko se wódpravj, tej mdzesz Vpan Fein-Kaszeba.

P. A trzeba od tego placjc?

K. Rada novezszo njck njebjerze; ale wód wóle kózdeho zalezi, cze chce
co na wutrzimanje vegórza dac, a przevileje gvesno rechli wódbjerze.

P. A moje dzjecj beda takze Kaszubamj?

K. A to vej! Kó kje me Vpana nobilejeme, to przez to samo e dzece se
nobileja.

P. Jakze, moj Kochani, bedzje s jezikjem?

K. Muszisz sobje, Vpan, trzemac Kaszebskjeho szkolneho, a wón Vpana vnet
przekabaczi.

P. Ale, moj Kochani, njemjalbim jakjéj nagani v Polsce za to, zem
Kaszuba zostal.

K. Bron Boze, kó to je jak novjkszi zaszczet, chteri sobje ju dovno
Pólosze zeczele, ale jim naszi przodkovje vjnlgje trudnosce robjle,
wósoblevje Sobjeslav, Mszczugovje e Svjatopelk; a pótemu Krzizoce,,
zmjarzlo znija przez njch samech vegrzano, a nawóstatku jinszi
Mjemcovje. Mimo teho sa wu nas jesz yjedno Pólosze; a zos v Pólsce vjele
takich Vpan nalezesz, co maja swój indigenat z Kaszeb, e tech jak
norechli na vjelgich panov szekuja e jim gvjozde daja.

P. Co? To i Kaszubj moga gvjazdi nosjc?

K. Kó gvesno, bó to je vlosnje nasz herb. Me vszetce mjeszkome abo pód
cemna gvjozda abo pód jasnim xezece.

P. Mjasto stoleczne, co ma za herb?

K. Wóno mo lva a lososa, co wóznoczo móc na ladze e na mórze.

P. Ale, ale! moj Bracje, jeszcze jedno povjnjenem vjedzjec. Gdibi mnje
sje kto zapital: Kto zrodzjl pjérvszego Kaszube. Bo to biva, ze ten
zrodzjl ovego, a ov zrodzjl onego; ale kto zrodzjl Kaszube? Mozebi mj
kto povjedzjal, ze djabel; dopjerobim mjal sje do vikrecanja. A co
jeszcze gorsza, gdibi mj dokladnje to dovjodl, tobim sje njemalo
zavstidzjl, zem sje dal Kaszubje oszukac.

K. Moj Kochani Panje, muszi ten reno vstac e pózde jic spac, chto chce
Kaszebe wószekac. Ale zo to tesz mo Kaszeba v swóji noterze to dobre, ze
njgde njewószekujo, le provda a Bóge jidze. Jeszle chto Vpane póvje, ze
czort przekleti Kaszebe zrodzel, to vjerze mje Vpan, jak jem pódcevi
Kaszeba, ze ten z djobla godo. To je provda, ze czort przekleti njezeczi
czlovjekovj szszesco, e dlo teho jemu se decht vjedno przcivjo,
wósoblevje dobremu Kaszebje. Krotko a vezlovato takjemu bluznjerce tej
rzecze, ze póczatk Kaszebov je ten: Jich wójcamj sa senovje Bózki a jich
matkamj corki leckje. Czort njeje sene Bózkim anje peszna corka lecka;
tim spósobe Kaszebj anje wód djobla anje jeho macoche njepóchódza, le
wód Boga.

P. Ale jakze to Bog Kaszube zrodzjl?

K. Wóto tak, jak Abraham Jizaka, a Jizak Jakuba e jinech.

P. Bili cj takze Kaszubamj?

K. Abo jinaczi! A jesz jedni z nostarszerch, jak jem ju póvjedzel.

P. Czi onj takze na ratuszu Puckim sve diplomi odebrali?

K. Nje, wónj diplomov njewótrzimale, bó se v tim kraju rodzele.

P. Ale, moj Bracje, ja sliszalem przecjvnje, ze Kaszubj mjeli ukrzizovac
Christusa i ze onj vlasnje bili cj, ktorzi mu taka zelziva smjerc
zadali. Pravdaz to?

K. Moj Panje, zebe jeho zli czlovjek njebel vedel, tobe jeho zli ledze
njebele meczele e njewukrzizovale; e belbe wón tech rak wuszed. Ale jak
to se rzecze: dostac se le v mrovjszcze, a vnet ful mrovk. Provda, ze to
bele Kaszebj, ale grebi, co njmaja wósvjecenjo, co zeja bez przevilejov.

P. A gdzje sje Judasz narodzjl? Czili nje v Kaszubach?

K. Kó jo, ale v grebceh, vlosnje v jich giovnim mjesce Kóscerzenje.

P. To pevnje ztamtad musjeli bic i krzizovnjci Christusa?

K. Albo to nje. Vpan vjesz, ze Judasz, kjej pószed do Pana Jezusa do
wógrojca, tej se soba zabrel vjelga grepe lede, a to te z tech bórov wód
Kóscerzena e Chójnjc. Jch moze Vpon letko pó tvorzi e stroju póznac; bó
wu nas anje wasov anje dlugich sukjen anje pasov njenosza anje nas tu
Leczokamj njeprzezevaja jak jich, co przed lati vjedno leczokóve chódoki
nosele.

P. Vszakze mj sje zdaje, ze to jest lud chrzescijanski i bardzo pobozni.

K. Vpan provde godosz, bó wónj ve vszetkim sveho naczelnjka Judasza
nasladeja, chteri vlosnje tak zrobjel, jak Pana Jezusa zaprzedel. Wón
wódnjos pjenjadze do kóscola e zalovel za grzeche, ze zdradzal krev
njevjnna; a wónj zos zaleja, ze njevjnneho wumeczele. Mjele apostolovje
do czenjenjo, njszle jich navrocele e njejeden te swóje zece stracel.

P. Ale moj Bracje. jakze Ti mozesz ludzj obmavjac i jich vinovac, kjedi
njevjesz dokladnje o jich vistepku. Albo Ti vjesz zapevnje, ze Borovjci
wukrzizovali Christusa.

K. Moj Panje, jo njgde njegodaje, kje jo co decht gvesno njevjem; ale wó
czim jo jem przekonani, to jo póvjodaje. Tak jo jem ros, bedac v
tetejszech stronach, z vlosne tetejszeho szkolneho gebe czel, kje wón se
v móji przetomnosci zapitel: Chto wukrzizovei Kristusa? Jasz tu jeden z
nostarszech e nowuczenszech szkólokov vstaje e wódpóvjodo: Naszi
przodkovje. Na co szkolni wódrzek: barzo dobrze. Tak mje se vedaje, ze
to muszi bec provda.--

P. A u vas jak ucza? Kto ukrzizovala Chrstusa?

K. Zedze; a pó Zedach cesle. Ale Zedze krzizovale celestneho; a cesle je
drzevjaneho.

P. Moj Bracje, mamej jeszcze jedno pitanje, ale cjeho do ucha: Povjedz
mj tez tak szczerze z Kaszubska, jak rozumjsz: Czili vszisci
Fein-Kaszubj sa poczcivj ludzje i czili sje mozna na njeh spuscjc i jich
poczcivoscj ufac.--

K. (pód nose) Dajgo djobe, jak wón mje teros zajachel, co se njemde mog
vevjchlac, bó doch Póloch schitrzel e mje wuchvocel--ale ju musze, bó
jidze wó moj pódcevi charakter. (glosno) Nje kózdi Fein Kaszeba je
pódcevi. To je wósoblevszi dor wód Pana Bóga. Bó jedni Kaszebj sa
pódcevi z przerodzenjo; a ti sa z pókolenjo Jaffeta: jinni wucza se ba
pódcevemj, a ti sa z pókolenjo Sema; a jesz jinszi, provde veznac musze,
chóc s bólesca serca, sa szelmamj z notere, a ti sa z pókolenjo Chama. E
ti to vlosnje sa, wó chterech Kristus rzek: Njech rosta jasz do znjva, a
pótemu jich spole. O gdebe wón jich ju dzis spolel, bó nam dobrim
Kaszebam le vstid e sromote robja.--P. A sa tez vszisci Fein-Kaszebj
vjernimj?--K, (pód nose). Vej ju zos knepel v drodze, njech czort spoli.
(glosno). To provda, mój Panje, ze ti, co wód Chama póchódza, znjvja,
dze njeseles, bjerza, dze njck njepólozele.--

P. Teraz, moj Kochani, o Kaszubach juz dosic vjem i chce se do jutra nad
tim dobrze zastanovjc, co na prziszlosé mj vipada zrobjc.--K. Jo no to
zezvolaja, ale na dzisejsze pózegnanje: njebedze Vpan taki e zazima
tobaki, bó dobro tobaczka wód pana Macka!--P. A gdzje pan Macjek?--K. V
Lebórgu na rogu.--P. Chvala Panu Bogu!





End of Project Gutenberg's Rozmowa Pòlocha z Kaszëba, by Florian Ceynowa

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ROZMOWA PÒLOCHA Z KASZËBA ***

***** This file should be named 28296-8.txt or 28296-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/2/9/28296/

Produced by Zasoby Kaszubsko-Pomorskie/Nasze Kaszuby
(http://www.naszekaszuby.pl), Project Rastko - Kashuby,
Zoran Stefanovic, Jimmy O'Regan and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://dp.rastko.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
